---
title: "Note 4: SQL"
layout: mathjax
parent: Notes
---

# Note 4: SQL

- <https://www.cs.sjtu.edu.cn/~qyin/teaching/db2024/Lec3-SQL-1.pdf>
- <https://www.cs.sjtu.edu.cn/~qyin/teaching/db2024/Lec4-SQL-2.pdf>
- <https://www.cs.sjtu.edu.cn/~qyin/teaching/db2024/Lec5-SQL-3.pdf>

## SQL

- SQL is the standard query language supported by most DBMS.
	- **SQL**: **S**tructured **Q**uery **L**anuage
	- Pronounced “S-Q-L” or “sequel”
	- **A brief history**
		- IBM system R, early 1970s
		- ANSI/ISO SQL-86 (SQL1)
		- ANSI SQL-89
		- **ANSI/ISO SQL-92 (SQL2)**
		- ANSI/ISO SQL:1999 (SQL3)
		- SQL:2003, SQL:2005, SQL:2008, SQL:2011, SQL:2016, SQL:2019
		- **SQL:2023**, adds data type JSON, add **SQL/PGQ** for property graph queries

## Relational Database language

- **Procedural**: specify what data are needed and how to get the data.
- **Declarative**: specify what data are needed without specifying how to get the data.
- **DDL** (**D**ata **D**efinition **L**anguage): Specification notation for defining the database schema.
- **DML** (**D**ata **M**anipulation **L**anguage): DML is also known as query language.

## DDL

```sql
CREATE TABLE R(
	...,
	attribute_name attribute_type,
	..., [integrity_constraints],
	...
);
DROP TABLE R;
```

e.g.

```sql
create table department -- sql is insensitive to case
	(dept_name varchar(20), -- sql is insensitive to white spaces
	building varchar(15), -- everything from '--' to the end of
	budget numeric(12,2), -- line is ignored
	primary key(dept_name)); -- primary key constraint
drop table department;
```

## Built-in data types in SQL

Table: Basic data types in SQL

|                        |                                                                   |
| ---------------------- | ----------------------------------------------------------------- |
| `char(n)`              | fixed-length string with **len**=n                                |
| `varchar(n)`           | variable-length string with **max_len**=n                         |
| `int`, `smallint`      | integer, small integer                                            |
| `numeric(p,d)`         | fixed point number<br>                                            |
| real, double precision | floating point and double-precision<br>floating point numbers<br> |
| `float(n)`             | floating-point number, with precision at least n digits           |

- **Machine dependent types**: int, smallint, real, double precision.
- Each type has a special value called **NULL**..
- **NULL** means that the value is **unknown** or not **applicable**.
	- SQL introduce special rules for dealing with NULL’s.

## Integrity constraints

CREATE TABLE instructor ( ID varchar(5), name varchar(20) not null, dept_name varchar(20), salary numeric(8,2), primary key (ID), foreign key (dept_name) references department);

- primary key (A1, . . . , An): attributes A1, …, An form the primary key for the relation.
- foreign key (A1, . . . , An) references S: the values of attributes (A1, . . . , Ak) must correspond to values of the primary key of table S.
- not null: the null value is not allowed for the specified attribute.
- Primary keys are not nullable.

## Basic database modification

Insertion: insert a tuple into table R INSERT INTO R(A_1,..,A_n) VALUES (v_1,...,v_n); Example: INSERT INTO instructor VALUES('10211', 'Turing', 'Comp. Sci.', 95000); INSERT INTO instructor(ID, name) VALUES('10222', 'Root'); • Deletion: purge tuples satisfying a given condition from table R DELETE FROM R WHERE condition Example: ◦ DELETE FROM instructor WHERE name='Turing'; ◦ DELETE FROM student; • DBMS will prevent any update to the database that would violate an integrity constraint.

## SQL Queries

SELECT A1, A2, …, An FROM R1, R2, …, Rm WHERE P; A basic sql query can be expressed by a SELECT-FROM-WHERE statement as shown above. • A1, A2, …, An: a list of desired attributes in the query. • R1, R2, …, Rm: a list of tables accessed during the query evaluation. • P: a filtering predicate involving the attributes from R1, R2, …, Rm. Example List the ID and name of every instructor from the Computer Science department. • SELECT ID, name FROM instructor WHERE dept_name = 'Comp. Sci.';

The WHERE clause is optional. SELECT * from instructor; -- * is a shorthand for all attributes • Use logical connectives AND, OR and NOT in the WHERE clause. SELECT ID, name FROM student WHERE tot_cred > 30 AND (dept_name = 'Physics' OR dept_name = 'Music'); • SELECT list can contain expressions SELECT ID, name, salary/12 FROM instructor; • Use a relation name prefix to distinguish attributes with the same name. SELECT student.name, instructor.name FROM student, advisor, instructor WHERE student.ID = advisor.S_ID AND advisor.i_ID = instructor.ID;

Semantics of SFW statements for each tuple t1 ∈ R1 do … for each tuple tm ∈ Rm do if P is true w.r.t. t1,…, tm then evaluate A1, …, An according to t1, …, tm to produce a tuple in the result Table: SELECT A1, A2, …, An FROM R1, R2, …, Rm WHERE P Question. Is the above SQL query equivalent to the following relational algebra query? ΠA1,...,An (σP(R1 × · · · × Rm)).

Bag semantics vs. set semantics • SQL adopts bag (i.e., multiset) semantics by default. – That is, duplicates are allowed in query results. • Use keyword DISTINCT to eliminate duplicates explicitly. dept_name Finance History Comp. Sci. Physics History Comp. Sci. SELECT dept_name from instructor; dept_name Finance History Comp. Sci. Physics SELECT DISTINCT dept_name from instructor;

## String operations

Strings literals (case sensitive) are quoted by single quotes. SELECT ID, name FROM instructor WHERE dept_name = 'Comp. Sci'; • Comparison: str1 < str2 w.r.t. the lexicographic order. - Similar for =, ⩾, <, ⩽, <>. • Pattern matching: LIKE matches a string against a pattern. ◦ The percent (%) character matches any string of zero or more characters. SELECT name FROM instructor WHERE name LIKE '%and%'; ◦ The underscore (_) character matches any single character. SELECT ID FROM instructor WHERE name LIKE '___'; ◦ Use keyword escape to specify an escape character. SELECT ID FROM instructor WHERE name LIKE 'ab\%cd' ESCAPE '\';

## Renaming

Keyword AS in the SELECT to rename attributes. SELECT ID, salary/12 AS month_salary FROM instructor; • Keyword AS in the FROM clause to rename relations. SELECT DISTINCT name FROM instructor, advisor AS S, advisor AS T WHERE instructor.ID=S.i_ID AND S.i_ID = T.i_ID AND S.s_ID <> T.s_ID; • The keyword AS is optional. SELECT ID, salary/12 month_salary FROM instructor;

## Ordering output

SELECT ... FROM ... [WHERE ...] ORDER BY ..., column[ASC|DESC], ...; • Append a ORDER BY clause at the end of a SFW query to sort the query result. ◦ DESC = descending, ASC=ascending. ◦ ASC is the default option. • List all instructors, sort them by salary (descending) and name (ascending). SELECT * FROM instructor ORDER BY salary DESC, name;

## Limit output

A LIMIT n clause can be append to a query to limit the number of tuples in output. • We can write top-n queries by combing an ORDER BY clause and a LIMIT n clause. Example • SELECT * FROM instructor LIMIT 2; • SELECT name FROM instructor ORDER BY salary DESC LIMIT 1; • SELECT ID FROM STUDENT ORDER BY tot_cred LIMIT 3;

## Set operations

SELECT ... FROM ... WHERE ... UNION|INTERSECT|EXCEPT SELECT ... FROM ... WHERE ...; • SQL supports UNION, INTERSECT and EXCEPT as in RA. • They all eliminate duplicates by default. • To retain all duplicates in query results, explicitly use keyword ALL – UNION ALL, INTERSECT ALL, EXCEPT ALL